write explanation to solution of wormhole sort (#5144)
cpinitiative/usaco-guide: solutions/silver/usaco-992.mdx

id: usaco-992
source: USACO Silver 2020 January
title: Wormhole Sort
author: Óscar Garries, Neo Wang, Kevin Sheng, Ruben Jing
---

[Official Analysis (Java)](http://www.usaco.org/current/data/sol_wormsort_silver_jan20.html)

## Solution 1 - Binary Search and Floodfill

### Explanation

> We start by searching for the maximum minimal wormhole width $x$. This can be optimized with binary search as it allows us to find the answer in $\mathcal O(\log \max w_i)$ time. The wormhole width always increases towards the right and always decreases towards the left, making binary search applicable.

Reviewer: what does the "right" and "left" mean?

Author: Wormhole width kind of like an array where each element is equal to their respective indices; number increases towards right of array and decreases towards left.

I hope I made this more clear in my update.

id: usaco-992
source: USACO Silver 2020 January
title: Wormhole Sort
author: Óscar Garries, Neo Wang, Kevin Sheng, Ruben Jing
---

[Official Analysis (Java)](http://www.usaco.org/current/data/sol_wormsort_silver_jan20.html)

## Solution 1 - Binary Search and Floodfill

### Explanation

> Suppose that cow $1$ is at position $3$. In order to place cow $3$ in the correct position, there must be a wormhole of at least width $x$ that connects positions $1$ and $3$. The number $1$ represents $i$ while the number $3$ represents $p_i$. Therefore, in order for a cow $i$ to be in the correct position, there must be a wormhole of at least width $x$ connecting $i$ and $p_i$.

Reviewer: juse use $i$ and $p_i$ from the get-go

Author: Should be fixed

> If a wormhole connects $i$ and $p_i$, these two positions must be in the same connected component. We can find connected components using floodfill.

Reviewer: Wait, i associate floodfill with dfsing through a grid. You meant just a regular DFS?

Author: I tried matching the explanation with the already provided solution, which says it is floodfill. The solution uses BFS. Should I also change the solution name from `Binary Search and Floodfill` to `Binary Search and BFS`?

> Once all connected components are found, we check if each cow $i$ is in the same connected component as $p_i$. If at least one cow $i$ is not able to move to $p_i$, then it is not possible to sort the cows with wormholes of at least width $x$.

Reviewer: What makes this problem difficult is it's not clear how sorting related to connected components. If you want your editorial to stand out you should explain this.

Author: I tried doing this, tell me if it's good.

> We binary search on $x$ to find the optimal solution.

Reviewer: brief desc of why binary search works (i.e. why it's monotonic)

Author: fixed

id: usaco-992
source: USACO Silver 2020 January
title: Wormhole Sort
author: Óscar Garries, Neo Wang, Kevin Sheng, Ruben Jing
---

[Official Analysis (Java)](http://www.usaco.org/current/data/sol_wormsort_silver_jan20.html)

## Solution 1 - Binary Search and BFS

If a certain wormhole width works, any larger wormhole width will work as well.
Similarly, if a width fails, any smaller width will also fail.
These two facts make it so that we can binary search on the minimal wormhole width.

To check if a given minimal wormhole width $x$ is valid, we use BFS to find all positions that can reach each other by traversing wormholes that are at most width $x$.

> For example, when ignoring restrictions on the width of a wormhole, $\{1, 2, 3, 4\}$ are all in one connected component.

Reviewer 2: can you give a more non-trivial example

id: usaco-992
source: USACO Silver 2020 January
title: Wormhole Sort
author: Óscar Garries, Neo Wang, Kevin Sheng, Ruben Jing
---

[Official Analysis (Java)](http://www.usaco.org/current/data/sol_wormsort_silver_jan20.html)

> ## Solution 1 - Binary Search and BFS

Reviewer: why BFS? arent u using a DFS in the code?

If a certain wormhole width works, any larger wormhole width will work as well.
Similarly, if a width fails, any smaller width will also fail.
These two facts make it so that we can binary search on the minimal wormhole width.

> To check if a given minimal wormhole width $x$ is valid, we use BFS to find all positions
> that can reach each other by traversing wormholes that are at most width $x$.
> Then we look at each cow's initial position along with the position it's supposed to be in.
> If the two are in the same component, we're golden.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To check if a given minimal wormhole width $x$ is valid, we use DFS to find all positions
that can reach each other by traversing wormholes at most width $x$.
If the cow's initial and sorted positions are both part of the same component, we've found a valid wormhole width!
```
